2018-fall_statgaps/README.md, before:

# BMB 961-301: Gaps, Missteps, and Errors in Statistical Data Analysis

* [Description](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#description)
* [Prerequisites](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#prerequisites)
* [Instructor Contact Information](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#instructor-contact-information)
* [Course Outline and Materials](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#course-outline-and-materials)
* [Schedule, Location, Calendar, and Office Hours](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#schedule-location-calendar-and-office-hours)
* [Website and Communication](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#website-and-communication)
* [Course Activities](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#course-activities)
* [Grading Information](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#grading-information)
* [Attendance, Conduct, Honesty, and Accommodations](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#attendance-conduct-honesty-accomodations)


## Description
This is an advanced short (1-credit) course designed to:
1. Discuss common misunderstandings & typical errors in the practice of statistical data analysis.
2. Provide a mental toolkit for critical thinking and enquiry of analytical methods and results.

Classes will involve lectures, discussions, hands-on exercises, and homework about concepts critical to the day-to-day use and consumption of quantitative/computational techniques.

### Prerequisites
This is *not* an introductory course in statistics or programming. We will assume: 1) Familiarity with basic statistics & probability. 2) Ability to do basic data wrangling, analyses, & visualization using R or Python.
- Strongly recommended MSU courses: CMSE 201 and CMSE 890 Sec 301-or-304 and Sec 302.
- Check out some [recommended online preparatory materials](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#recommended-preparatory-materials) listed below that you can use to refresh all these concetps.

### Registration
If you are not a declared Biochemistry graduate student, please contact Arjun (arjun@msu.edu) and then submit the online override request form found [here](https://bmb.natsci.msu.edu/undergraduate/override-request-form/). For more specific information, please visit this [page](https://bmb.natsci.msu.edu/undergraduate/undergrad-grad-course-descriptions/).

### Courve Survey
Please fill-out the [course survey](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdZLf7RtVsQACe4XIO_a3AhGSXIJzJ9JfL9EFWXvcN2eB9fFA/viewform) to help me know better about your background, motivation, etc.


## Instructor Contact Information
Arjun Krishnan | ...
:------------ | :------------
Affiliation | Dept. Computational Mathematics, Science, and Engineering</br>Dept. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Office | 2507H Engineering Building
Contact | Email: arjun@msu.edu</br>Twitter: [@compbiologist](https://twitter.com/compbiologist)</br>Website: https://cmse.msu.edu/directory/faculty/arjun-krishnan/

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#bmb-961-301-gaps-missteps-and-errors-in-statistical-data-analysis) ]


## Course Outline and Materials

### Major Topics
_(subject to changes)_
* Underpowered statistics
* Pseudoreplication
* P-hacking & multiple hypothesis correction
* Difference in significance & significant differences
* Base rates & permutation tests
* Regression to the mean
* Descriptive statistics & spurious correlations
* Estimation of error and uncertainty

Each topic will be covered in one class.

### Recommended Preparatory Materials
*I'm recommending the open & free versions of all the materials below.*

#### Python
* [Learning Python the Hard Way](https://learnpythonthehardway.org/book/)
    - If you are new to programming and want to learn Python...
* MIT OpenCourseWare (video lectures + notes + assignments)
    - If you already know programming in some other language and want to learn Python, computational and data science ...
    * [Introduction to Computer Science and Programming in Python](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-0001-introduction-to-computer-science-and-programming-in-python-fall-2016/)
    * [Introduction to Computational Thinking and Data Science](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-0002-introduction-to-computational-thinking-and-data-science-fall-2016/)
* [Data Visualization with Python](https://www.kaggle.com/learn/data-visualisation)

#### R
* [Programming with R](http://swcarpentry.github.io/r-novice-inflammation/)
    - If you are new to programming and want to learn R...
* [R for Data Science](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/)
    - An awesome book on using R for data analysis and visualization!
* [R Cheatsheets](https://www.rstudio.com/resources/cheatsheets/)
    - Great set of visually-appealing cheatsheet.

#### Probability and statistics
* [Khan Academy – Statistics](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL1328115D3D8A2566)
* [Great Short Videos on Probability and Statistics](https://www.youtube.com/user/jbstatistics/playlists)
* [Think Stats](https://greenteapress.com/wp/think-stats-2e/) (book + code + solutions)
    - Introduction to Probability and Statistics (designed for Python programmers but can very much be used with other languages).

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#bmb-961-301-gaps-missteps-and-errors-in-statistical-data-analysis) ]


## Schedule, Location, Calendar, and Office Hours
Nov 5 – Dec 5, 2018

S/L | Info
:------------ | :------------
Schedule | Mon and Wed</br>12:40-2:00 pm
Location | 202 Biochemistry Building

### Calendar
*Coming Soon*

#### Project deadlines
Item | Due date
:--- | -------:
Final student presentations - Part 1 | Mon, Dec 10
Final project presentations - Part 2 | Wed, Dec 12

### Office Hours
*Coming Soon*

I will block this time from my schedule and be present in my office.

Couple of things to note:
1. While I'm happy to chat with you in person, many times, just sending me a message on Slack with your questions/concerns might work as well. So, if you have specific Qs in mind, just shoot me a message and let's see if we can resolve it then and there.
2. If you would indeed like to meet in person, please try to meet me during this time. But, don't worry if you can't make it during this window for some reason. Again, just send me a message on Slack and we'll find a time that works for both of us.

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#bmb-961-301-gaps-missteps-and-errors-in-statistical-data-analysis) ]


## Website and Communication

### Course website
This [GitHub repo](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps) will serve as the course website.  

### Communication
The primary mode of communication in this course (including major announcements), will be the course Slack account *[coming soon]*. All of you should have invitations to join this account in your MSU email.  

**Emails**  
Although the bulk of the communication will take place via Slack, at times (rarely), we will send out important course information via email. This email is sent to your MSU email address (the one that ends in “@msu.edu”). You are responsible for all information sent out to your University email account, and for checking this account on a regular basis.

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#bmb-961-301-gaps-missteps-and-errors-in-statistical-data-analysis) ]


## Course Activities
*Coming Soon*

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#bmb-961-301-gaps-missteps-and-errors-in-statistical-data-analysis) ]

## Grading Information
*Coming Soon*

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#bmb-961-301-gaps-missteps-and-errors-in-statistical-data-analysis) ]


## Attendance, Conduct, Honesty, and Accommodations

### Class Attendance
This class is heavily based on material presented and worked on in class, and it is critical that you attend and participate fully every week! Therefore, class attendance is absolutely required. An unexcused absence will result in zero points for the day. Arriving late or leaving early without prior arrangement with the instructor of your session counts as an unexcused absence. Note that if you have a legitimate reason to miss class (such as job, graduate school, or medical school interviews), you must arrange this ahead of time to be excused from class. Three unexcused absences will result in the reduction of your grade by one step (e.g., from 4.0 to 3.5), with additional absences reducing your grade further at the discretion of the course instructor.

### Code of Conduct
All conduct should serve the singular goal of sustain a friendly, supportive, and fun environment where we can do our best work and have a great time doing it.
* Do work that you’re proud of, from the smallest piece of code to the entire project.
* Be supportive of your classmates; respect each others' strengths, weaknesses, differences, and beliefs.
* Communicate openly & respectfully with everyone in the class.
* Ask for help; at the same time, respect and appreciate others' time and effort.

Respectful and responsible behavior is expected at all times, which includes not interrupting other students, turning your cell phone off, refraining from non-course-related use of electronic devices, and not using offensive or demeaning language in our discussions. Flagrant or repeated violations of this expectation may result in ejection from the classroom, grade-related penalties, and/or involvement of the university Ombudsperson.

I am unequivocally dedicated to providing a harassment-free experience for everyone, regardless of gender, gender identity and expression, age, sexual orientation, disability, physical appearance, body size, race, or religion (or lack thereof). We will not tolerate harassment of colleagues in any form. Behaviors that could be considered discriminatory or harassing, or unwanted sexual attention, will not be tolerated and will be immediately reported to the appropriate MSU office (which may include the MSU Police Department).

### Academic honesty
Intellectual integrity is the foundation of the scientific enterprise. In all instances, you must do your own work and give proper credit to all sources that you use in your papers and oral presentations – any instance of submitting another person's work, ideas, or wording as your own counts as plagiarism. This includes failing to cite any direct quotations in your essays, research paper, class debate, or written presentation. The MSU College of Natural Science adheres to the policies of academic honesty as specified in the General Student Regulations 1.0, Protection of Scholarship and Grades, and in the all-University statement on Integrity of Scholarship and Grades, which are included in Spartan Life: Student Handbook and Resource Guide. Students who plagiarize will receive a 0.0 in the course. In addition, University policy requires that any cheating offense, regardless of the magnitude of the infraction or punishment decided upon by the professor, be reported immediately to the dean of the student's college.

It is important to note that **plagiarism in the context of this course includes, but is not limited to**, directly copying another student's solutions to in-class or homework problems; copying materials from online sources, textbooks, or other reference materials without citing those references in your source code or documentation, or having somebody else do your pre-class work, in-class work, or homework on your behalf. Any work that is done in collaboration with other students should state this explicitly, and have their names as well as yours listed clearly.

More broadly, we ask that students adhere to the Spartan Code of Honor academic pledge, as written by the Associated Students of Michigan State University (ASMSU): "As a Spartan, I will strive to uphold values of the highest ethical standard. I will practice honesty in my work, foster honesty in my peers, and take pride in knowing that honor is worth more than grades. I will carry these values beyond my time as a student at Michigan State University, continuing the endeavor to build personal integrity in all that I do."

### Accomodations
If you have a university-documented learning difficulty or require other accommodations, please provide me with your VISA as soon as possible and speak with me about how I can assist you in your learning.  If you do not have a VISA but have been documented with a learning difficulty or other problems for which you may still require accommodation, please contact MSU’s Resource Center for People with Disabilities (355-9642) in order to acquire current documentation.

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#bmb-961-301-gaps-missteps-and-errors-in-statistical-data-analysis) ]

Commit message:

added link to course flyer

2018-fall_statgaps/README.md, after:

# BMB 961-301: Gaps, Missteps, and Errors in Statistical Data Analysis

* [Description](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#description)
* [Prerequisites](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#prerequisites)
* [Instructor Contact Information](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#instructor-contact-information)
* [Course Outline and Materials](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#course-outline-and-materials)
* [Schedule, Location, Calendar, and Office Hours](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#schedule-location-calendar-and-office-hours)
* [Website and Communication](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#website-and-communication)
* [Course Activities](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#course-activities)
* [Grading Information](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#grading-information)
* [Attendance, Conduct, Honesty, and Accommodations](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#attendance-conduct-honesty-accomodations)


## Description
This is an advanced short (1-credit) course designed to:
1. Discuss common misunderstandings & typical errors in the practice of statistical data analysis.
2. Provide a mental toolkit for critical thinking and enquiry of analytical methods and results.

Classes will involve lectures, discussions, hands-on exercises, and homework about concepts critical to the day-to-day use and consumption of quantitative/computational techniques. Please use this [course flyer](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2018-fall_statgaps/BMB961-301_Nov18_Flyer.pdf) to help spread the word.

### Prerequisites
This is *not* an introductory course in statistics or programming. We will assume: 1) Familiarity with basic statistics & probability. 2) Ability to do basic data wrangling, analyses, & visualization using R or Python.
- Strongly recommended MSU courses: CMSE 201 and CMSE 890 Sec 301-or-304 and Sec 302.
- Check out some [recommended online preparatory materials](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps/README.md#recommended-preparatory-materials) listed below that you can use to refresh all these concetps.

### Registration
If you are not a declared Biochemistry graduate student, please contact Arjun (arjun@msu.edu) and then submit the online override request form found [here](https://bmb.natsci.msu.edu/undergraduate/override-request-form/). For more specific information, please visit this [page](https://bmb.natsci.msu.edu/undergraduate/undergrad-grad-course-descriptions/).

### Courve Survey
Please fill-out the [course survey](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdZLf7RtVsQACe4XIO_a3AhGSXIJzJ9JfL9EFWXvcN2eB9fFA/viewform) to help me know better about your background, motivation, etc.


## Instructor Contact Information
Arjun Krishnan | ...
:------------ | :------------
Affiliation | Dept. Computational Mathematics, Science, and Engineering</br>Dept. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Office | 2507H Engineering Building
Contact | Email: arjun@msu.edu</br>Twitter: [@compbiologist](https://twitter.com/compbiologist)</br>Website: https://cmse.msu.edu/directory/faculty/arjun-krishnan/

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#bmb-961-301-gaps-missteps-and-errors-in-statistical-data-analysis) ]


## Course Outline and Materials

### Major Topics
_(subject to changes)_
* Underpowered statistics
* Pseudoreplication
* P-hacking & multiple hypothesis correction
* Difference in significance & significant differences
* Base rates & permutation tests
* Regression to the mean
* Descriptive statistics & spurious correlations
* Estimation of error and uncertainty

Each topic will be covered in one class.

### Recommended Preparatory Materials
*I'm recommending the open & free versions of all the materials below.*

#### Python
* [Learning Python the Hard Way](https://learnpythonthehardway.org/book/)
    - If you are new to programming and want to learn Python...
* MIT OpenCourseWare (video lectures + notes + assignments)
    - If you already know programming in some other language and want to learn Python, computational and data science ...
    * [Introduction to Computer Science and Programming in Python](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-0001-introduction-to-computer-science-and-programming-in-python-fall-2016/)
    * [Introduction to Computational Thinking and Data Science](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-0002-introduction-to-computational-thinking-and-data-science-fall-2016/)
* [Data Visualization with Python](https://www.kaggle.com/learn/data-visualisation)

#### R
* [Programming with R](http://swcarpentry.github.io/r-novice-inflammation/)
    - If you are new to programming and want to learn R...
* [R for Data Science](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/)
    - An awesome book on using R for data analysis and visualization!
* [R Cheatsheets](https://www.rstudio.com/resources/cheatsheets/)
    - Great set of visually-appealing cheatsheet.

#### Probability and statistics
* [Khan Academy – Statistics](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL1328115D3D8A2566)
* [Great Short Videos on Probability and Statistics](https://www.youtube.com/user/jbstatistics/playlists)
* [Think Stats](https://greenteapress.com/wp/think-stats-2e/) (book + code + solutions)
    - Introduction to Probability and Statistics (designed for Python programmers but can very much be used with other languages).

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#bmb-961-301-gaps-missteps-and-errors-in-statistical-data-analysis) ]


## Schedule, Location, Calendar, and Office Hours
Nov 5 – Dec 5, 2018

S/L | Info
:------------ | :------------
Schedule | Mon and Wed</br>12:40-2:00 pm
Location | 202 Biochemistry Building

### Calendar
*Coming Soon*

#### Project deadlines
Item | Due date
:--- | -------:
Final student presentations - Part 1 | Mon, Dec 10
Final project presentations - Part 2 | Wed, Dec 12

### Office Hours
*Coming Soon*

I will block this time from my schedule and be present in my office.

Couple of things to note:
1. While I'm happy to chat with you in person, many times, just sending me a message on Slack with your questions/concerns might work as well. So, if you have specific Qs in mind, just shoot me a message and let's see if we can resolve it then and there.
2. If you would indeed like to meet in person, please try to meet me during this time. But, don't worry if you can't make it during this window for some reason. Again, just send me a message on Slack and we'll find a time that works for both of us.

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#bmb-961-301-gaps-missteps-and-errors-in-statistical-data-analysis) ]


## Website and Communication

### Course website
This [GitHub repo](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/2018-fall_statgaps) will serve as the course website.  

### Communication
The primary mode of communication in this course (including major announcements), will be the course Slack account *[coming soon]*. All of you should have invitations to join this account in your MSU email.  

**Emails**  
Although the bulk of the communication will take place via Slack, at times (rarely), we will send out important course information via email. This email is sent to your MSU email address (the one that ends in “@msu.edu”). You are responsible for all information sent out to your University email account, and for checking this account on a regular basis.

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#bmb-961-301-gaps-missteps-and-errors-in-statistical-data-analysis) ]


## Course Activities
*Coming Soon*

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#bmb-961-301-gaps-missteps-and-errors-in-statistical-data-analysis) ]

## Grading Information
*Coming Soon*

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#bmb-961-301-gaps-missteps-and-errors-in-statistical-data-analysis) ]


## Attendance, Conduct, Honesty, and Accommodations

### Class Attendance
This class is heavily based on material presented and worked on in class, and it is critical that you attend and participate fully every week! Therefore, class attendance is absolutely required. An unexcused absence will result in zero points for the day. Arriving late or leaving early without prior arrangement with the instructor of your session counts as an unexcused absence. Note that if you have a legitimate reason to miss class (such as job, graduate school, or medical school interviews), you must arrange this ahead of time to be excused from class. Three unexcused absences will result in the reduction of your grade by one step (e.g., from 4.0 to 3.5), with additional absences reducing your grade further at the discretion of the course instructor.

### Code of Conduct
All conduct should serve the singular goal of sustain a friendly, supportive, and fun environment where we can do our best work and have a great time doing it.
* Do work that you’re proud of, from the smallest piece of code to the entire project.
* Be supportive of your classmates; respect each others' strengths, weaknesses, differences, and beliefs.
* Communicate openly & respectfully with everyone in the class.
* Ask for help; at the same time, respect and appreciate others' time and effort.

Respectful and responsible behavior is expected at all times, which includes not interrupting other students, turning your cell phone off, refraining from non-course-related use of electronic devices, and not using offensive or demeaning language in our discussions. Flagrant or repeated violations of this expectation may result in ejection from the classroom, grade-related penalties, and/or involvement of the university Ombudsperson.

I am unequivocally dedicated to providing a harassment-free experience for everyone, regardless of gender, gender identity and expression, age, sexual orientation, disability, physical appearance, body size, race, or religion (or lack thereof). We will not tolerate harassment of colleagues in any form. Behaviors that could be considered discriminatory or harassing, or unwanted sexual attention, will not be tolerated and will be immediately reported to the appropriate MSU office (which may include the MSU Police Department).

### Academic honesty
Intellectual integrity is the foundation of the scientific enterprise. In all instances, you must do your own work and give proper credit to all sources that you use in your papers and oral presentations – any instance of submitting another person's work, ideas, or wording as your own counts as plagiarism. This includes failing to cite any direct quotations in your essays, research paper, class debate, or written presentation. The MSU College of Natural Science adheres to the policies of academic honesty as specified in the General Student Regulations 1.0, Protection of Scholarship and Grades, and in the all-University statement on Integrity of Scholarship and Grades, which are included in Spartan Life: Student Handbook and Resource Guide. Students who plagiarize will receive a 0.0 in the course. In addition, University policy requires that any cheating offense, regardless of the magnitude of the infraction or punishment decided upon by the professor, be reported immediately to the dean of the student's college.

It is important to note that **plagiarism in the context of this course includes, but is not limited to**, directly copying another student's solutions to in-class or homework problems; copying materials from online sources, textbooks, or other reference materials without citing those references in your source code or documentation, or having somebody else do your pre-class work, in-class work, or homework on your behalf. Any work that is done in collaboration with other students should state this explicitly, and have their names as well as yours listed clearly.

More broadly, we ask that students adhere to the Spartan Code of Honor academic pledge, as written by the Associated Students of Michigan State University (ASMSU): "As a Spartan, I will strive to uphold values of the highest ethical standard. I will practice honesty in my work, foster honesty in my peers, and take pride in knowing that honor is worth more than grades. I will carry these values beyond my time as a student at Michigan State University, continuing the endeavor to build personal integrity in all that I do."

### Accomodations
If you have a university-documented learning difficulty or require other accommodations, please provide me with your VISA as soon as possible and speak with me about how I can assist you in your learning.  If you do not have a VISA but have been documented with a learning difficulty or other problems for which you may still require accommodation, please contact MSU’s Resource Center for People with Disabilities (355-9642) in order to acquire current documentation.

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#bmb-961-301-gaps-missteps-and-errors-in-statistical-data-analysis) ]
