compbio/README.md, before:

# CMSE 491: Bioinformatics and Computational Biology

This course is an introduction to contemporary topics in bioinformatics and computational biology, dealing with combining large-scale data and modern analytical techniques to gain biological/biomedical insights. In each topic, centered around a recent paper, we will discuss the major biological & biomedical questions, explore the relevant molecular/genomics/biomedical datasets, and understand the underlying statistical, probabilistic, & machine-learning approaches.

Students will learn how to formulate problems for quantitative inquiry, design computational projects, understand and think critically about data & methods, communicate research findings, perform reproducible research, and practice open science. Students will apply all these by carrying out a group project, presenting their project in class, and submit a report at the end of the course.

**Note**  
Open to both undergraduate and graduate students. Counts toward the CMSE minor, graduate certificates, and dual PhD. Please email Heather Johnson at john1451@msu.edu for an override.

**Prerequisites**  
CMSE 201 and two semesters of introductory biology (LB 144 and 145 OR BS 161 and 162 OR BS 181H and 182H, or equivalent).
Statistics at the level of STT 231 is strongly recommended. Basically, it would be assumed that you:
- know how to code in one of the mainstream languages like Python and R,
- have an understanding of basic statistics and probability, and
- have studied basic genetics, molecular biology, and cellular biology.

## Contents
* [Instructor Contact Information](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#instructor-contact-information)
* [Course Outline and Materials](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#course-outline-and-materials)
* [Schedule, Location, Calendar, and Office Hours](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#schedule-location-calendar-and-office-hours)
* [Website and Communication](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#website-and-communication)
* [Course Activities](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#course-activities)
* [Grading Information](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#grading-information)
* [Attendance, Conduct, Honesty, and Accommodations](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#attendance-conduct-honesty-accomodations)

## Instructor Contact Information
Arjun Krishnan | ...
:------------ | :------------
Affiliation | Dept. Computational Mathematics, Science, and Engineering</br>Dept. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Office | 2507H Engineering Building
Contact | Email: arjun@msu.edu</br>Twitter: [@compbiologist](https://twitter.com/compbiologist)</br>Website: https://cmse.msu.edu/directory/faculty/arjun-krishnan/

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#cmse-491-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]

## Course Outline and Materials
### Major Topics
_(subject to changes)_
* Genome assembly and annotation
* Sequence alignment and pattern finding
* Comparative genomics
* Genetic variation and quantitative genetics
* Regulatory genomics
* Functional genomics
* Molecular and digital evolution
* Molecular docking and dynamics
* Protein structure prediction
* Modeling cellular pathways
* Metabolomics
* Large-scale biological networks

Each topic is covered over two classes, a "Lecture" and a "Paper discussion".

### Recommended Materials
TBD

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#cmse-491-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]

## Schedule, Location, Calendar, and Office Hours
S/L | Info
:------------ | :------------
Schedule | Mon and Wed</br>8:30-9:50 am
Location | 202 Urban Planning & Land. Arch. Building

### Calendar
This calendar contains the class schedule and the links to the lecture slides and reading materials. Download the PDF file [here](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/Schedule.pdf).

Week | Date | Topic | Content | Learning Materials
:----- | ----------: | :-- | :------------- | :--
Week 1 | Mon, Jan 08 | Introduction and Overview | Course overview | [In-coming survey](https://goo.gl/forms/Vt0tFiakqVB42Mmo2)
Week 1 | Wed, Jan 10 | Introduction and Overview | Getting started | TBD
Week 2 | Mon, Jan 15 | No class (MLK Day) | |
Week 2 | Wed, Jan 17 | Genome assembly and annotation | Lecture | TBD
Week 3 | Mon, Jan 22 | Genome assembly and annotation | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 3 | Wed, Jan 24 | Sequence alignment and pattern finding | Lecture | TBD
Week 4 | Mon, Jan 29 | Sequence alignment and pattern finding | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 4 | Wed, Jan 31 | Comparative genomics | Lecture | TBD
Week 5 | Mon, Feb 05 | Comparative genomics | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 5 | Wed, Feb 07 | Genetic variation and quantitative genetics | Lecture | TBD
Week 6 | Mon, Feb 12 | Genetic variation and quantitative genetics | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 6 | Wed, Feb 14 | Regulatory genomics | Lecture | TBD
Week 7 | Mon, Feb 19 | Regulatory genomics | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 7 | Wed, Feb 21 | Functional genomics | Lecture | TBD
Week 7 | Mon, Feb 26 | Functional genomics | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 8 | Wed, Feb 28 | Mini Primers | TBD | TBD
Week 8 | Mon, Mar 05 | No class (Spring break) | TBD | TBD
Week 9 | Wed, Mar 07 | No class (Spring break) | TBD | TBD
Week 9 | Mon, Mar 12 | Mid-term project proposal presentations | |
Week 10 | Wed, Mar 14 | Molecular and digital evolution | Lecture | TBD
Week 10 | Mon, Mar 19 | Molecular and digital evolution | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 11 | Wed, Mar 21 | Molecular docking and dynamics | Lecture | TBD
Week 11 | Mon, Mar 26 | Molecular docking and dynamics | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 12 | Wed, Mar 28 | Protein structure prediction | Lecture | TBD
Week 12 | Mon, Apr 02 | Protein structure prediction | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 13 | Wed, Apr 04 | Modeling cellular pathways | Lecture | TBD
Week 13 | Mon, Apr 09 | Modeling cellular pathways | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 14 | Wed, Apr 11 | Metabolomics | Lecture | TBD
Week 14 | Mon, Apr 16 | Metabolomics | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 15 | Wed, Apr 18 | Large-scale biological networks | Lecture | TBD
Week 15 | Mon, Apr 23 | Large-scale biological networks | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 16 | Wed, Apr 25 | Final project presentations 1 | |
Week 16 | Mon, Apr 30 | Final project presentations 2 | |

#### Project deadlines
Item | Due date
:--- | -------:
Project profile | Mon, Jan 29
Project topic/team | Wed, Feb 07
Project pre-proposal | Wed, Feb 14
Project proposal | Mon, Feb 26
Proposal reviews | Mon, Mar 05
Mid-term project proposal presentations | Mon, Mar 12
Review response | Mon, Mar 14
Mid-course project report | Wed, Apr 04
Final project report | Wed, Apr 25
Final project presentations | Wed, Apr 25 and Mon, Apr 30

### Office Hours
TBD

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#cmse-491-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]

## Website and Communication

### Course website
This [GitHub repo](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/compbio) will serve as the course website.  

### Communication
The primary mode of communication in this course (including major announcements), will be the course Slack account https://cmse491bioinfocompbio.slack.com. All of you should have invitations to join this account in your MSU email.  

**Emails**
Although the bulk of the communication will take place via Slack, at times (rarely), we will send out important course information via email. This email is sent to your MSU email address (the one that ends in “@msu.edu”). You are responsible for all information sent out to your University email account, and for checking this account on a regular basis.

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#cmse-491-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]

## Course Activities

### Pre-class Assignments
For each topic, you will be assigned a paper after the topic's "lecture" class that you are required to read. The link to the PDF of the paper will be posted on this page next to the topic on the [Calendar](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/compbio#calendar) along with instructions on a specific analysis in the paper you should pay special attention to. You are required to turn-in a two-page report containing a summary and critique of the paper. This report is due _before_ the topic's "paper discussion" class. Points will be deducted for reports shorter or longer than two-pages. Wrong papers will be graded as zero.

**Page 1** of your report should contain the following three sections:
1. _Background_
    - What problem/task is the paper trying to address? What is the biological problem and/or the computational challenge?
    - How was the problem/task addressed up to that point and what were the limits of the _then_ current practice?
2. _Summary of contributions_
    - What is the contribution of this paper in terms of approach, algorithmic techniques, computational ideas?
    - Summarize the conclusion(s) your draw from each main figure in the paper. Based on your conclusions, are the major claims of the paper justified?
3. _Limitations and Future directions_
    - What are the limitations of this paper or open questions that arise from this paper?
    - What are your suggestions for addressing these limitations?

**Page 2** of your report (_Critique of specific figure_) should contain the following four sections:
1. _Data_
    - What data did they use to perform the analysis presented in the figure?
    - Where did each piece of data come from?
2. _Methods_
    - What techniques and algorithms did they use?
    - Does the paper have a detailed description of how to perform this analysis, enough for someone to repeat that analysis?
    - Does the paper have source code to reproduce the presented results?
3. _Evaluation_
    - What are the measures/metrics plotted for each figure panel?
    - How is the success of each analysis evaluated?
4. _Conclusions_
    - Are the conclusions you draw from the figure in agreement with those drawn by the authors?

### Class Participation
Ask questions
Correct me if I am wrong

### Scribing
TBD

### Semester Project and Presentation
After you have formed teams, I will create private channels for each team on Slack so that you can communicate effectively with each other.

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#cmse-491-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]

## Grading Information
Activity | Percentage
:----- | ---------:
Pre-class assignments | ~35%
Class participation | ~15%
Scribing | ~10%
Project | ~40%

### Grading Scale
Point | Percentage
----: | ---------:
4.0 | ≥ 90%
3.5 | ≥ 85%
3.0 | ≥ 80%
2.5 | ≥ 75%
2.0 | ≥ 70%
1.5 | ≥ 65%
1.0 | ≥ 60%
0.0 | < 60%

**Note:** Grades will not be curved. Your grade is based on your own effort and progress, not based on competition with your classmates.

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#cmse-491-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]

## Attendance, Conduct, Honesty, and Accommodations

### Class Attendance
This class is heavily based on material presented and worked on in class, and it is critical that you attend and participate fully every week! Therefore, class attendance is absolutely required. An unexcused absence will result in zero points for the day. Arriving late or leaving early without prior arrangement with the instructor of your session counts as an unexcused absence. Note that if you have a legitimate reason to miss class (such as job, graduate school, or medical school interviews), you must arrange this ahead of time to be excused from class. Three unexcused absences will result in the reduction of your grade by one step (e.g., from 4.0 to 3.5), with additional absences reducing your grade further at the discretion of the course instructor.

### Code of Conduct
All conduct should serve the singular goal of sustain a friendly, supportive, and fun environment where we can do our best work and have a great time doing it.
* Do work that you’re proud of, from the smallest piece of code to the entire project.
* Be supportive of your classmates; respect each others' strengths, weaknesses, differences, and beliefs.
* Communicate openly & respectfully with everyone in the class.
* Ask for help; at the same time, respect and appreciate others' time and effort.

Respectful and responsible behavior is expected at all times, which includes not interrupting other students, turning your cell phone off, refraining from non-course-related use of electronic devices, and not using offensive or demeaning language in our discussions. Flagrant or repeated violations of this expectation may result in ejection from the classroom, grade-related penalties, and/or involvement of the university Ombudsperson.

I am unequivocally dedicated to providing a harassment-free experience for everyone, regardless of gender, gender identity and expression, age, sexual orientation, disability, physical appearance, body size, race, or religion (or lack thereof). We will not tolerate harassment of colleagues in any form. Behaviors that could be considered discriminatory or harassing, or unwanted sexual attention, will not be tolerated and will be immediately reported to the appropriate MSU office (which may include the MSU Police Department).

### Academic honesty
Intellectual integrity is the foundation of the scientific enterprise. In all instances, you must do your own work and give proper credit to all sources that you use in your papers and oral presentations – any instance of submitting another person's work, ideas, or wording as your own counts as plagiarism. This includes failing to cite any direct quotations in your essays, research paper, class debate, or written presentation. The MSU College of Natural Science adheres to the policies of academic honesty as specified in the General Student Regulations 1.0, Protection of Scholarship and Grades, and in the all-University statement on Integrity of Scholarship and Grades, which are included in Spartan Life: Student Handbook and Resource Guide. Students who plagiarize will receive a 0.0 in the course. In addition, University policy requires that any cheating offense, regardless of the magnitude of the infraction or punishment decided upon by the professor, be reported immediately to the dean of the student's college.

It is important to note that **plagiarism in the context of this course includes, but is not limited to**, directly copying another student's solutions to in-class or homework problems; copying materials from online sources, textbooks, or other reference materials without citing those references in your source code or documentation, or having somebody else do your pre-class work, in-class work, or homework on your behalf. Any work that is done in collaboration with other students should state this explicitly, and have their names as well as yours listed clearly.

More broadly, we ask that students adhere to the Spartan Code of Honor academic pledge, as written by the Associated Students of Michigan State University (ASMSU): "As a Spartan, I will strive to uphold values of the highest ethical standard. I will practice honesty in my work, foster honesty in my peers, and take pride in knowing that honor is worth more than grades. I will carry these values beyond my time as a student at Michigan State University, continuing the endeavor to build personal integrity in all that I do."

### Accomodations
If you have a university-documented learning difficulty or require other accommodations, please provide me with your VISA as soon as possible and speak with me about how I can assist you in your learning.  If you do not have a VISA but have been documented with a learning difficulty or other problems for which you may still require accommodation, please contact MSU’s Resource Center for People with Disabilities (355-9642) in order to acquire current documentation.

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#cmse-491-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]

Commit message:

added class participation & scribing notes

compbio/README.md, after:

# CMSE 491: Bioinformatics and Computational Biology

This course is an introduction to contemporary topics in bioinformatics and computational biology, dealing with combining large-scale data and modern analytical techniques to gain biological/biomedical insights. In each topic, centered around a recent paper, we will discuss the major biological & biomedical questions, explore the relevant molecular/genomics/biomedical datasets, and understand the underlying statistical, probabilistic, & machine-learning approaches.

Students will learn how to formulate problems for quantitative inquiry, design computational projects, understand and think critically about data & methods, communicate research findings, perform reproducible research, and practice open science. Students will apply all these by carrying out a group project, presenting their project in class, and submit a report at the end of the course.

**Note**  
Open to both undergraduate and graduate students. Counts toward the CMSE minor, graduate certificates, and dual PhD. Please email Heather Johnson at john1451@msu.edu for an override.

**Prerequisites**  
CMSE 201 and two semesters of introductory biology (LB 144 and 145 OR BS 161 and 162 OR BS 181H and 182H, or equivalent).
Statistics at the level of STT 231 is strongly recommended. Basically, it would be assumed that you:
- know how to code in one of the mainstream languages like Python and R,
- have an understanding of basic statistics and probability, and
- have studied basic genetics, molecular biology, and cellular biology.

## Contents
* [Instructor Contact Information](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#instructor-contact-information)
* [Course Outline and Materials](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#course-outline-and-materials)
* [Schedule, Location, Calendar, and Office Hours](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#schedule-location-calendar-and-office-hours)
* [Website and Communication](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#website-and-communication)
* [Course Activities](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#course-activities)
* [Grading Information](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#grading-information)
* [Attendance, Conduct, Honesty, and Accommodations](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#attendance-conduct-honesty-accomodations)

## Instructor Contact Information
Arjun Krishnan | ...
:------------ | :------------
Affiliation | Dept. Computational Mathematics, Science, and Engineering</br>Dept. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Office | 2507H Engineering Building
Contact | Email: arjun@msu.edu</br>Twitter: [@compbiologist](https://twitter.com/compbiologist)</br>Website: https://cmse.msu.edu/directory/faculty/arjun-krishnan/

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#cmse-491-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]

## Course Outline and Materials
### Major Topics
_(subject to changes)_
* Genome assembly and annotation
* Sequence alignment and pattern finding
* Comparative genomics
* Genetic variation and quantitative genetics
* Regulatory genomics
* Functional genomics
* Molecular and digital evolution
* Molecular docking and dynamics
* Protein structure prediction
* Modeling cellular pathways
* Metabolomics
* Large-scale biological networks

Each topic is covered over two classes, a "Lecture" and a "Paper discussion".

### Recommended Materials
TBD

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#cmse-491-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]

## Schedule, Location, Calendar, and Office Hours
S/L | Info
:------------ | :------------
Schedule | Mon and Wed</br>8:30-9:50 am
Location | 202 Urban Planning & Land. Arch. Building

### Calendar
This calendar contains the class schedule and the links to the lecture slides and reading materials. Download the PDF file [here](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/Schedule.pdf).

Week | Date | Topic | Content | Learning Materials
:----- | ----------: | :-- | :------------- | :--
Week 1 | Mon, Jan 08 | Introduction and Overview | Course overview | [In-coming survey](https://goo.gl/forms/Vt0tFiakqVB42Mmo2)
Week 1 | Wed, Jan 10 | Introduction and Overview | Getting started | TBD
Week 2 | Mon, Jan 15 | No class (MLK Day) | |
Week 2 | Wed, Jan 17 | Genome assembly and annotation | Lecture | TBD
Week 3 | Mon, Jan 22 | Genome assembly and annotation | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 3 | Wed, Jan 24 | Sequence alignment and pattern finding | Lecture | TBD
Week 4 | Mon, Jan 29 | Sequence alignment and pattern finding | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 4 | Wed, Jan 31 | Comparative genomics | Lecture | TBD
Week 5 | Mon, Feb 05 | Comparative genomics | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 5 | Wed, Feb 07 | Genetic variation and quantitative genetics | Lecture | TBD
Week 6 | Mon, Feb 12 | Genetic variation and quantitative genetics | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 6 | Wed, Feb 14 | Regulatory genomics | Lecture | TBD
Week 7 | Mon, Feb 19 | Regulatory genomics | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 7 | Wed, Feb 21 | Functional genomics | Lecture | TBD
Week 7 | Mon, Feb 26 | Functional genomics | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 8 | Wed, Feb 28 | Mini Primers | TBD | TBD
Week 8 | Mon, Mar 05 | No class (Spring break) | TBD | TBD
Week 9 | Wed, Mar 07 | No class (Spring break) | TBD | TBD
Week 9 | Mon, Mar 12 | Mid-term project proposal presentations | |
Week 10 | Wed, Mar 14 | Molecular and digital evolution | Lecture | TBD
Week 10 | Mon, Mar 19 | Molecular and digital evolution | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 11 | Wed, Mar 21 | Molecular docking and dynamics | Lecture | TBD
Week 11 | Mon, Mar 26 | Molecular docking and dynamics | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 12 | Wed, Mar 28 | Protein structure prediction | Lecture | TBD
Week 12 | Mon, Apr 02 | Protein structure prediction | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 13 | Wed, Apr 04 | Modeling cellular pathways | Lecture | TBD
Week 13 | Mon, Apr 09 | Modeling cellular pathways | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 14 | Wed, Apr 11 | Metabolomics | Lecture | TBD
Week 14 | Mon, Apr 16 | Metabolomics | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 15 | Wed, Apr 18 | Large-scale biological networks | Lecture | TBD
Week 15 | Mon, Apr 23 | Large-scale biological networks | Paper discussion | TBD
Week 16 | Wed, Apr 25 | Final project presentations 1 | |
Week 16 | Mon, Apr 30 | Final project presentations 2 | |

#### Project deadlines
Item | Due date
:--- | -------:
Project profile | Mon, Jan 29
Project topic/team | Wed, Feb 07
Project pre-proposal | Wed, Feb 14
Project proposal | Mon, Feb 26
Proposal reviews | Mon, Mar 05
Mid-term project proposal presentations | Mon, Mar 12
Review response | Mon, Mar 14
Mid-course project report | Wed, Apr 04
Final project report | Wed, Apr 25
Final project presentations 1 | Wed, Apr 25
Final project presentations 2 | Mon, Apr 30

### Office Hours
TBD

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#cmse-491-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]

## Website and Communication

### Course website
This [GitHub repo](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/compbio) will serve as the course website.  

### Communication
The primary mode of communication in this course (including major announcements), will be the course Slack account https://cmse491bioinfocompbio.slack.com. All of you should have invitations to join this account in your MSU email.  

**Emails**
Although the bulk of the communication will take place via Slack, at times (rarely), we will send out important course information via email. This email is sent to your MSU email address (the one that ends in “@msu.edu”). You are responsible for all information sent out to your University email account, and for checking this account on a regular basis.

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#cmse-491-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]

## Course Activities

### Pre-class Assignments
For each topic, you will be assigned a paper after the topic's "lecture" class that you are required to read. The link to the PDF of the paper will be posted on this page next to the topic on the [Calendar](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/tree/master/compbio#calendar) along with instructions on a specific analysis in the paper you should pay special attention to. You are required to turn-in a two-page report containing a summary and critique of the paper. This report is due _before_ the topic's "paper discussion" class. Points will be deducted for reports shorter or longer than two-pages. Wrong papers will be graded as zero.

**Page 1** of your report should contain the following three sections:
1. _Background_
    - What problem/task is the paper trying to address? What is the biological problem and/or the computational challenge?
    - How was the problem/task addressed up to that point and what were the limits of the _then_ current practice?
2. _Summary of contributions_
    - What is the contribution of this paper in terms of approach, algorithmic techniques, computational ideas?
    - Summarize the conclusion(s) your draw from each main figure in the paper. Based on your conclusions, are the major claims of the paper justified?
3. _Limitations and Future directions_
    - What are the limitations of this paper or open questions that arise from this paper?
    - What are your suggestions for addressing these limitations?

**Page 2** of your report (_Critique of specific figure_) should contain the following four sections:
1. _Data_
    - What data did they use to perform the analysis presented in the figure?
    - Where did each piece of data come from?
2. _Methods_
    - What techniques and algorithms did they use?
    - Does the paper have a detailed description of how to perform this analysis, enough for someone to repeat that analysis?
    - Does the paper have source code to reproduce the presented results?
3. _Evaluation_
    - What are the measures/metrics plotted for each figure panel?
    - How is the success of each analysis evaluated?
4. _Conclusions_
    - Are the conclusions you draw from the figure in agreement with those drawn by the authors?

### Class Participation
- Do the pre-class assignments and additional readings
- Show up to class
- Work in groups during in-class discussion sessions
- No one will have the perfect background: **Ask questions** about computational or biological concepts
- Correct me when I am wrong

### Scribing
- Each lecture will have two dedicated scribes who will take notes on the lecture.
- Individually complete draft of scribe notes due in 3 days after lecture.
    - I will read and give comments/suggestions.
- The two scribes will then work together to combine their drafts+comments into a single final scribe notes due in 6 days after lecture.

### Semester Project and Presentation
After you have formed teams, I will create private channels for each team on Slack so that you can communicate effectively with each other.

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#cmse-491-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]

## Grading Information
Activity | Percentage
:----- | ---------:
Pre-class assignments | ~35%
Class participation | ~15%
Scribing | ~10%
Project | ~40%

### Grading Scale
Point | Percentage
----: | ---------:
4.0 | ≥ 90%
3.5 | ≥ 85%
3.0 | ≥ 80%
2.5 | ≥ 75%
2.0 | ≥ 70%
1.5 | ≥ 65%
1.0 | ≥ 60%
0.0 | < 60%

**Note:** Grades will not be curved. Your grade is based on your own effort and progress, not based on competition with your classmates.

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#cmse-491-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]

## Attendance, Conduct, Honesty, and Accommodations

### Class Attendance
This class is heavily based on material presented and worked on in class, and it is critical that you attend and participate fully every week! Therefore, class attendance is absolutely required. An unexcused absence will result in zero points for the day. Arriving late or leaving early without prior arrangement with the instructor of your session counts as an unexcused absence. Note that if you have a legitimate reason to miss class (such as job, graduate school, or medical school interviews), you must arrange this ahead of time to be excused from class. Three unexcused absences will result in the reduction of your grade by one step (e.g., from 4.0 to 3.5), with additional absences reducing your grade further at the discretion of the course instructor.

### Code of Conduct
All conduct should serve the singular goal of sustain a friendly, supportive, and fun environment where we can do our best work and have a great time doing it.
* Do work that you’re proud of, from the smallest piece of code to the entire project.
* Be supportive of your classmates; respect each others' strengths, weaknesses, differences, and beliefs.
* Communicate openly & respectfully with everyone in the class.
* Ask for help; at the same time, respect and appreciate others' time and effort.

Respectful and responsible behavior is expected at all times, which includes not interrupting other students, turning your cell phone off, refraining from non-course-related use of electronic devices, and not using offensive or demeaning language in our discussions. Flagrant or repeated violations of this expectation may result in ejection from the classroom, grade-related penalties, and/or involvement of the university Ombudsperson.

I am unequivocally dedicated to providing a harassment-free experience for everyone, regardless of gender, gender identity and expression, age, sexual orientation, disability, physical appearance, body size, race, or religion (or lack thereof). We will not tolerate harassment of colleagues in any form. Behaviors that could be considered discriminatory or harassing, or unwanted sexual attention, will not be tolerated and will be immediately reported to the appropriate MSU office (which may include the MSU Police Department).

### Academic honesty
Intellectual integrity is the foundation of the scientific enterprise. In all instances, you must do your own work and give proper credit to all sources that you use in your papers and oral presentations – any instance of submitting another person's work, ideas, or wording as your own counts as plagiarism. This includes failing to cite any direct quotations in your essays, research paper, class debate, or written presentation. The MSU College of Natural Science adheres to the policies of academic honesty as specified in the General Student Regulations 1.0, Protection of Scholarship and Grades, and in the all-University statement on Integrity of Scholarship and Grades, which are included in Spartan Life: Student Handbook and Resource Guide. Students who plagiarize will receive a 0.0 in the course. In addition, University policy requires that any cheating offense, regardless of the magnitude of the infraction or punishment decided upon by the professor, be reported immediately to the dean of the student's college.

It is important to note that **plagiarism in the context of this course includes, but is not limited to**, directly copying another student's solutions to in-class or homework problems; copying materials from online sources, textbooks, or other reference materials without citing those references in your source code or documentation, or having somebody else do your pre-class work, in-class work, or homework on your behalf. Any work that is done in collaboration with other students should state this explicitly, and have their names as well as yours listed clearly.

More broadly, we ask that students adhere to the Spartan Code of Honor academic pledge, as written by the Associated Students of Michigan State University (ASMSU): "As a Spartan, I will strive to uphold values of the highest ethical standard. I will practice honesty in my work, foster honesty in my peers, and take pride in knowing that honor is worth more than grades. I will carry these values beyond my time as a student at Michigan State University, continuing the endeavor to build personal integrity in all that I do."

### Accomodations
If you have a university-documented learning difficulty or require other accommodations, please provide me with your VISA as soon as possible and speak with me about how I can assist you in your learning.  If you do not have a VISA but have been documented with a learning difficulty or other problems for which you may still require accommodation, please contact MSU’s Resource Center for People with Disabilities (355-9642) in order to acquire current documentation.

\[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/compbio/README.md#cmse-491-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]
