2021-spring_compbio/Assignments/Comparative-genomics-and-phylogenetics_Assignment-and-paper-presentation.md, before:

# Comparative genomics and Phylogenetics | Assignment + Paper presentation

Like I mentioned in one of the first couple of classes, developing usable software goes hand-in-hand with developing novel computational methods. Doing this well requires a mixture of skills across biology, experimental technology, methods/algorithms, and hardware/software engineering. If pulling-off a method+software combo like this once is hard, keeping at it – improving on all these aspects and releasing newer versions across decades – is ever harder.

To give you all a taste of what doing something like looks like, I would like you to consider the method+software called MUMmer designed for rapidly aligning large DNA sequences including whole genomes to other genomes. From the time it was releases in 1999, MUMmer remains a widely-used software system. Check out the website for the latest version: https://mummer4.github.io/

On the [class calendar](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/schedule-lectures-assignments.md#class-calendar), you'll see links to the four papers corresponding to the four versions of MUMmer. For this week’s assignment, I thought it’ll be interesting for all of us to do something different from the previous assignments to get a different learning experience.

## Students doing the assignment (aka not presenting)
Your assignment is to work with your learning group to read all four MUMmer papers, discuss with each other, and chart the progress of the method+software over the years from 1999 to 2018 based on the _table below_. Submit your assignment using [this form](https://forms.gle/Fgtzxg58eWZci93q8) before class on **Friday, Feb 12**.

The table should contain 4 rows & 4 columns:
![MUMmer assignment template](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/Assignments/mummer-blank-table.png)

Within each cell in this table, record the relevant list of the key advances (bullet points) in each of the four aspects for MUMmer v1 to v4.

### Notes on what I’m looking for in each aspect:
* Biological / conceptual: Biological scenarios & molecular details that are incorporated into the method for the first time in a particular version. These could be assumptions on things like GC-content, repeats, gaps, etc., or they could new findings during this time-period we’re tracing (1999-2018).
* Technological / experimental: Improvements/changes due to newer (biological) technologies for sequencing longer & less error-prone reads (that are then assembled into ‘better’ genomic sequences); faster & cheaper technology to sequence increasingly larger number of genomes with high coverage.
* Algorithmic / methodological: Newer algorithms, computational tricks, novel data structures, numerical approximations, better workflows, etc.
* Hardware / software: Better hardware-software features such as multithreading/parallelizations, running on clusters/GPUs, memory/space requirements, newer features/functions in the software, newer/more parameters available for the user, etc.

While everyone needs to individually complete this assignment, **all members of a particular group can submit the same PDF containing the completed table**, and then answer the remaining questions.


## Presenters
For the presentation on Friday, please plan on discussing exactly the contents of this table. One suggestion is to devote 1-2 slides per aspect (column) to discuss how that aspect has changed over the 4 versions.

### Notes on preparing the presentation:
* Use other resources beyond the paper to illustrate the problem, including illustrations, etc. Provide citations for the source materials on the slide.
* Avoid directly using dense figures directly from papers/other-sources. Instead, split complex multi-part figures in the paper into several slides; Capture/zoom-into parts of figure & annotate with boxes/arrows.
* Avoid large blocks of text. Convert methods to flowcharts & annotate flowcharts.; You’re welcome to draw neatly on paper & photograph it.
* Be prepared to define phrases/terminology on your slide.; Google it, read-up; No problem if any idea/concept is still unclear even after reading. Just bring it up in class & we can discuss.

Commit message:

add note about form for the presentation group

2021-spring_compbio/Assignments/Comparative-genomics-and-phylogenetics_Assignment-and-paper-presentation.md, after:

# Comparative genomics and Phylogenetics | Assignment + Paper presentation

Like I mentioned in one of the first couple of classes, developing usable software goes hand-in-hand with developing novel computational methods. Doing this well requires a mixture of skills across biology, experimental technology, methods/algorithms, and hardware/software engineering. If pulling-off a method+software combo like this once is hard, keeping at it – improving on all these aspects and releasing newer versions across decades – is ever harder.

To give you all a taste of what doing something like looks like, I would like you to consider the method+software called MUMmer designed for rapidly aligning large DNA sequences including whole genomes to other genomes. From the time it was releases in 1999, MUMmer remains a widely-used software system. Check out the website for the latest version: https://mummer4.github.io/

On the [class calendar](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/schedule-lectures-assignments.md#class-calendar), you'll see links to the four papers corresponding to the four versions of MUMmer. For this week’s assignment, I thought it’ll be interesting for all of us to do something different from the previous assignments to get a different learning experience.

## Students doing the assignment (aka not presenting)
Your assignment is to work with your learning group to read all four MUMmer papers, discuss with each other, and chart the progress of the method+software over the years from 1999 to 2018 based on the _table below_. Submit your assignment using [this form](https://forms.gle/Fgtzxg58eWZci93q8) **before class on Friday, Feb 12**.

The table should contain 4 rows & 4 columns:
![MUMmer assignment template](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/Assignments/mummer-blank-table.png)

Within each cell in this table, record the relevant list of the key advances (bullet points) in each of the four aspects for MUMmer v1 to v4.

### Notes on what I’m looking for in each aspect:
* Biological / conceptual: Biological scenarios & molecular details that are incorporated into the method for the first time in a particular version. These could be assumptions on things like GC-content, repeats, gaps, etc., or they could new findings during this time-period we’re tracing (1999-2018).
* Technological / experimental: Improvements/changes due to newer (biological) technologies for sequencing longer & less error-prone reads (that are then assembled into ‘better’ genomic sequences); faster & cheaper technology to sequence increasingly larger number of genomes with high coverage.
* Algorithmic / methodological: Newer algorithms, computational tricks, novel data structures, numerical approximations, better workflows, etc.
* Hardware / software: Better hardware-software features such as multithreading/parallelizations, running on clusters/GPUs, memory/space requirements, newer features/functions in the software, newer/more parameters available for the user, etc.

While everyone needs to individually complete this assignment, **all members of a particular group can submit the same PDF containing the completed table**, and then answer the remaining questions.


## Presenters
For the presentation on Friday, please plan on discussing exactly the contents of this table. You could devote 1-2 slides per aspect (column) to discuss how that aspect has changed over the 4 versions.

In addition to the presentation, complete [this form](https://forms.gle/yeKpV5Fmyc8iZp2k6) this form individually to help me understand the roles each of you played in preparing and making the presentation. Submit this form by **11:59pm Friday, Feb 12**.  
_Note: Every member of the group needs to individually complete the form._

### Notes on preparing the presentation:
* Use other resources beyond the paper to illustrate the problem, including illustrations, etc. Provide citations for the source materials on the slide.
* Avoid directly using dense figures directly from papers/other-sources. Instead, split complex multi-part figures in the paper into several slides; Capture/zoom-into parts of figure & annotate with boxes/arrows.
* Avoid large blocks of text. Convert methods to flowcharts & annotate flowcharts.; You’re welcome to draw neatly on paper & photograph it.
* Be prepared to define phrases/terminology on your slide.; Google it, read-up; No problem if any idea/concept is still unclear even after reading. Just bring it up in class & we can discuss.
