2021-spring_compbio/course-activities-grading.md, before:

# [CMSE 410/890: Bioinformatics and Computational Biology](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/README.md)

>[Schedule, Lectures, and Assignments](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/schedule-lectures-assignments.md)  
>[Website and Communication](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/website-communication.md)  
>Course Activities and Grading  
>[Presence, Conduct, Honesty, and Accommodations](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/policies.md)  
>[Learning Online](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/learning-online.md)  

# Course Activities and Grading

## Class Participation
Each week is dedicated to one module where we will discuss multiple topics. For each module, Arjun will give lectures on Monday, Wednesday, and half of Friday. Then, one or two students (based on a pre-determined schedule) lead a discussion based on a paper relevant to that module.

### Lecture
During the lectures, Arjun will teach critcal concepts while frequently soliciting comments, questions, and answers. Learners will also be asked to engage in group-based activities following specified prompts.

### Paper discussion
You will also take turns to present the assigned paper during each topic's "Paper discussion" class. Make sure you sign-up.
- Two students together present each paper.
- The presentation should focus on the computational/analytical parts, not necessarily on detailed biological background & conclusions.
    1. What is the problem the authors are trying to solve? [description of the problem along with why it is important]
    2. What are their claims about the _then_ current practices and their limitations? [existing approaches to solve the problem & their pros-and-cons]
    3. What’s their approach? What’s new in it and what is their rationale for it being potentially successful? [description of the *new ideas*, their *merits* in comparison to existing ones, and *rationale*]
    4. What are the major contributions and limitations of this paper?
    5. What are some open questions and next steps (for addressing the limitations)?

Your role as a learner in this class is to:
- Do the pre-class assignments and additional readings.
- Show up to class.
- Work in groups during in-class discussion sessions.
- **Ask questions** about computational or biological concepts (because no one will have the perfect background).
- Correct me when I am wrong.

### Meeting Arjun


## Assignments
For each topic, you will be given an assignment after the topic's first "Lecture" class on Monday that you are required to work on and submit before beginning of the "paper discussion" class on Friday the same week. Links to the assignment will be posted on this page next to the topic on the [Calendar](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/schedule-lectures-assignments.md#calendar) and specific instructions will be posted on Slack.

## Semester Project and Presentation
A major goal of this course is to prepare you for performing original research in computational biology, and for effectively presenting your ideas and research. The semester project will serve as the most practical way to do exactly that.

Projects can take any one of the following flavors:
- Design and implement a new computational method for a task in biology
- Improve an existing method
- Perform an evaluation of several existing methods
- Develop a fully-reproducible documentation and codebase for an existing analysis in a paper

### Expected final outcomes
The outcomes of this semester-long project should include:
1. Well-documented code to:
    - download and process the data
    - perform the computational analysis and generate all the results
    - visualize the results as various plots
2. Detailed final report containing the following sections:
    - Abstract
    - Introduction
    - Data and Methods
    - Results and Discussion
    - Limitations and Future Directions
    - References
    - Glossary
3. A poster that describes your project - motivation, exact problem, approach, results, discussion & conclusions, limitations & future direcrtions, acknowledgements.

### Project milestones throughout the semester
There are **ten [project milestones](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/schedule-lectures-assignments.md#project-milestones)** throughout the course that will help you stay on track, enabling you to complete a substantial project.

#### 1. Reserach profile | Due: Fri, Jan 22
Describe your previous research, areas of research interest in bioinformatics / computational-biology, type of project that best fits your interests. Post this description in a profile that lets your classmates know you.

#### 2. Project topics | Due: Fri, Jan 29
Briefly describe project ideas.
NOTE: Meet with Arjun during the week of Mar Jan 24 to discuss project ideas, potential mentors, and relevant papers.

#### 3. Project pre-proposal | Due: Fri, Feb 05
Prepare a two-page pre-proposal (Page1: text; Page2: figures & references).

#### 4. Project proposal | Due: Fri, Feb 19
Write full proposal.
- Length: 5-pages (including figures & references; sections listed below); 1-inch margins; 1.15 line spacing; Arial, Times New Roman, or Helvetica font; 11pt font size for all text including figure/table titles/legends.
- Sections:
    - *Background, goals, & significance* (what is the problem you are hoping to address; what is the current approach & its limitations; what will you do & why is it likely to succeed; if successful, what is the broader impact)
    - *Datasets* (what datasets will you use; where are they from; what exactly do they contain; how are they formatted)
    - *Computational methods/approach* (what are the analytical methods; what are the specific software implementations you'll use; include your flowchart here)
    - *Evaluation plan* (how will you evaluate the results that you get; think in terms of how to test if a) your approach is working correctly without errors and b) your results make quantitative/biological sense and are meaningful)
    - *Potential challenges & alternative approaches* (what are some assumptions you are making that can fail; what are some potential limitations of your dataset or approach that might prevent you from achieving your aforementioned goals; what will you do as alternatives if you hit those limitations)
    - *Specific milestones* (what is the list of specific results/outcomes you will work on getting)

#### 5. Proposal reviews | Due: Fri, Feb 26
Review proposals. Detailed instructions will be provided.

#### 6. Mid-course project presentations | Due: Wed, Mar 10
Use the class time to record your presentation. Make sure to include the following information in your presentation:
– Broad area, some background, and what problem the project is going to address.
- Specific aims of the project, what achieving those aims will result in, and why do these results matter (why are they signficant and what impact might they have on future work)
- Description of your approach in the form of a clear flowchart that contains the following information as it pertains to your project:
    - Raw data → Preprocessing & quality control → Preliminary/exploratory analysis → Analysis/Model-building steps → Expected outcomes.
- Results from a thorough exploration and sanity checks of data.
    - Tables & plots to showcase various aspects of your datasets/problem.
- Clear description of your methods and software.
    - Usage & I/O format for each.
- Results from your preliminary analysis
    - With simple baselines, samples datasets, and toy examples.
- As you cover each of the above elements, make sure to mention how you have modified or revised them based on the peer reviews.

#### 7. Mid-course project presentation reviews | Due: Fri, Mar 12
Use the class time to review presentations by your peers based on the review assignments and rubrics.
NOTE: Meet with Arjun during the week of Mar 14 to discuss project progress, proposal reviews, and revised project plan.

#### 8. Mid-course project report | Due: Fri, Mar 19
Write and submit mid-course project report.

#### 9. Final project report | Due: Wed, Apr 21
Continue making substantial progress on proposed milestones.  
Complete milestones, finalize results, figures, write-up in conference publication format. As part of the report, comment on your overall project experience.

#### 10. Final project poster presentations | Thr, Apr 29, 12:45 – 2:45p


#### \[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/README.md#cmse-410-890-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]


## Grading Information
Activity | Percentage
:----- | ---------:
Assignments | ~35%
Class participation | ~15%
Project | ~50%

### Grading Scale
Point | Percentage
----: | ---------:
4.0 | ≥ 90%
3.5 | ≥ 85%
3.0 | ≥ 80%
2.5 | ≥ 75%
2.0 | ≥ 70%
1.5 | ≥ 65%
1.0 | ≥ 60%
0.0 | < 60%

**Note:** Grades will not be curved. Your grade is based on your own effort and progress, not based on competition with your classmates.

#### \[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/README.md#cmse-410-890-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]

Commit message:

add notes on student hour grade points

2021-spring_compbio/course-activities-grading.md, after:

# [CMSE 410/890: Bioinformatics and Computational Biology](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/README.md)

>[Schedule, Lectures, and Assignments](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/schedule-lectures-assignments.md)  
>[Website and Communication](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/website-communication.md)  
>Course Activities and Grading  
>[Presence, Conduct, Honesty, and Accommodations](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/policies.md)  
>[Learning Online](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/learning-online.md)  

# Course Activities and Grading

## Class Participation | ~25% of the grade
Each week is dedicated to one module where we will discuss multiple topics. For each module, Arjun will give lectures on Monday, Wednesday, and half of Friday. Then, a small group of students (based on a schedule determined at the beginning of the semester) will lead a discussion based on a paper relevant to that module.

### Lecture
During the lectures, Arjun will teach critcal concepts while frequently soliciting comments, questions, and answers. Learners will also be asked to engage in group-based activities and discussions following specified prompts.

### Paper discussion
You will also take turns to present the assigned paper during each topic's "Paper discussion" class. Make sure you sign-up.
- Two students together present each paper.
- The presentation should focus on the computational/analytical parts, not necessarily on detailed biological background & conclusions.
    1. What is the problem the authors are trying to solve? [description of the problem along with why it is important]
    2. What are their claims about the _then_ current practices and their limitations? [existing approaches to solve the problem & their pros-and-cons]
    3. What’s their approach? What’s new in it and what is their rationale for it being potentially successful? [description of the *new ideas*, their *merits* in comparison to existing ones, and *rationale*]
    4. What are the major contributions and limitations of this paper?
    5. What are some open questions and next steps (for addressing the limitations)?

Your role as a learner in this class is to:
- Do the pre-class assignments and additional readings.
- Show up to class.
- Work in groups during in-class discussion sessions.
- **Ask questions** about computational or biological concepts (because no one will have the perfect background).
- Correct me when I am wrong.

### Meeting Arjun
Grade points are also allocated for meeting Arjun at least _thrice_ over the semester during the student hours to discuss the project and the lecture materials:
1. Week of Jan 24 to introduce yourself and discuss project ideas, potential mentors, and relevant papers.
2. Week of Mar 14 to discuss project progress, proposal reviews, and revised project plan.
3. Any other time during the semester to discuss topics covered in any particular lecture.

## Assignments | ~25% of the grade
For each topic, you will be given an assignment after the topic's first "Lecture" class on Monday that you are required to work on and submit before beginning of the "paper discussion" class on Friday the same week. Links to the assignment will be posted on this page next to the topic on the [Calendar](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/schedule-lectures-assignments.md#calendar) and specific instructions will be posted on Slack.

## Semester Project and Presentation | ~50% of the grade
A major goal of this course is to prepare you for performing original research in computational biology, and for effectively presenting your ideas and research. The semester project will serve as the most practical way to do exactly that.

Projects can take any one of the following flavors:
- Design and implement a new computational method for a task in biology
- Improve an existing method
- Perform an evaluation of several existing methods
- Develop a fully-reproducible documentation and codebase for an existing analysis in a paper

### Expected final outcomes
The outcomes of this semester-long project should include:
1. Well-documented code to:
    - Download and process the data
    - Perform the computational analysis and generate all the results
    - Visualize the results as multiple tables/plots
2. Detailed final report containing the following sections:
    - Abstract
    - Introduction
    - Data and Methods
    - Results and Discussion
    - Limitations and Future Directions
    - References
    - Glossary
3. A poster that describes your project - motivation, exact problem, approach, results, discussion & conclusions, limitations & future direcrtions, acknowledgements.

### Project milestones throughout the semester
There are **ten [project milestones](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/schedule-lectures-assignments.md#project-milestones)** throughout the course that will help you stay on track, enabling you to complete a substantial project.

#### 1. Reserach profile | Due: Fri, Jan 22
Describe your previous research, areas of research interest in bioinformatics / computational-biology, type of project that best fits your interests. Post this description in a profile that lets your classmates know you.

#### 2. Project topics | Due: Fri, Jan 29
Briefly describe project ideas.  
NOTE: Meet with Arjun during the week of Jan 24 to introduce yourself and discuss project ideas, potential mentors, and relevant papers.

#### 3. Project pre-proposal | Due: Fri, Feb 05
Prepare a two-page pre-proposal (Page1: text; Page2: figures & references).

#### 4. Project proposal | Due: Fri, Feb 19
Write full proposal.
- Length: 5-pages (including figures & references; sections listed below); 1-inch margins; 1.15 line spacing; Arial, Times New Roman, or Helvetica font; 11pt font size for all text including figure/table titles/legends.
- Sections:
    - *Background, goals, & significance* (what is the problem you are hoping to address; what is the current approach & its limitations; what will you do & why is it likely to succeed; if successful, what is the broader impact)
    - *Datasets* (what datasets will you use; where are they from; what exactly do they contain; how are they formatted)
    - *Computational methods/approach* (what are the analytical methods; what are the specific software implementations you'll use; include your flowchart here)
    - *Evaluation plan* (how will you evaluate the results that you get; think in terms of how to test if a) your approach is working correctly without errors and b) your results make quantitative/biological sense and are meaningful)
    - *Potential challenges & alternative approaches* (what are some assumptions you are making that can fail; what are some potential limitations of your dataset or approach that might prevent you from achieving your aforementioned goals; what will you do as alternatives if you hit those limitations)
    - *Specific milestones* (what is the list of specific results/outcomes you will work on getting)

#### 5. Proposal reviews | Due: Fri, Feb 26
Review proposals. Detailed instructions will be provided.

#### 6. Mid-course project presentations | Due: Wed, Mar 10
Use the class time to record your presentation. Make sure to include the following information in your presentation:
– Broad area, some background, and what problem the project is going to address.
- Specific aims of the project, what achieving those aims will result in, and why do these results matter (why are they signficant and what impact might they have on future work)
- Description of your approach in the form of a clear flowchart that contains the following information as it pertains to your project:
    - Raw data → Preprocessing & quality control → Preliminary/exploratory analysis → Analysis/Model-building steps → Expected outcomes.
- Results from a thorough exploration and sanity checks of data.
    - Tables & plots to showcase various aspects of your datasets/problem.
- Clear description of your methods and software.
    - Usage & I/O format for each.
- Results from your preliminary analysis
    - With simple baselines, samples datasets, and toy examples.
- As you cover each of the above elements, make sure to mention how you have modified or revised them based on the peer reviews.

#### 7. Mid-course project presentation reviews | Due: Fri, Mar 12
Use the class time to review presentations by your peers based on the review assignments and rubrics.  
NOTE: Meet with Arjun during the week of Mar 14 to discuss project progress, proposal reviews, and revised project plan.

#### 8. Mid-course project report | Due: Fri, Mar 19
Write and submit mid-course project report.

#### 9. Final project report | Due: Wed, Apr 21
Continue making substantial progress on proposed milestones.  
Complete milestones, finalize results, figures, write-up in conference publication format. As part of the report, comment on your overall project experience.

#### 10. Final project poster presentations | Thr, Apr 29, 12:45 – 2:45p


#### \[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/README.md#cmse-410-890-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]


## Grading Information
Activity | Percentage
:----- | ---------:
Assignments | ~25%
Class participation | ~25%
Project | ~50%

### Grading Scale
Point | Percentage
----: | ---------:
4.0 | ≥ 90%
3.5 | ≥ 85%
3.0 | ≥ 80%
2.5 | ≥ 75%
2.0 | ≥ 70%
1.5 | ≥ 65%
1.0 | ≥ 60%
0.0 | < 60%

**Note:** Grades will not be curved. Your grade is based on your own effort and progress, not based on competition with your classmates.

#### \[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/README.md#cmse-410-890-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]
