2021-spring_compbio/policies.md, before:

# [CMSE 410/890: Bioinformatics and Computational Biology](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/README.md)

>[Schedule, Lectures, and Assignments](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/schedule-lectures-assignments.md)  
>[Website and Communication](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/website-communication.md)  
>[Course Activities and Grading](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/course-activities-grading.md)  
>Presence, Conduct, Honesty, and Accommodations  
>[Learning Online](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/learning-online.md)  


# Presence, Conduct, Honesty, and Accommodations
I think of each class I teach as a _collaborative learning community_ where we can all work together to enhance each other's learning. To foster this community, my goal is to make sure that our class is a space where all of you can join in, breathe, be seen & heard, be curious, and openly engage with the ideas. You absolutely belong here and you will be valued and respected. Your unique background, training, and life experiences are your strength, and everyone including me** will be benefit from listening to you and learning from you.

>** I have designed and am teaching this class to also maximize my learning, identify gaps in my knowledge, and find better ways of discussing each of the many complex/interesting ideas.

In service of this goal, below are all the policies we will follow. If you have a concern about the policies and procedures of this class, please contact me.  

## Class Presence
If you sincerely engage with the class and put in earnest effort, you will do well. Your can do so by:
- Completing the pre-class assignments and additional readings.
- Showing up to the online class on time and stay for the whole hour.
- Responding to prompts from Arjun during the lectures.
- Asking questions about computational or biological concepts (because no one will have the perfect background).
- Working in groups during in-class discussion sessions.
- Correcting me when I am wrong.

### Attendance
All these activities are heavily based on material presented and worked on in class. So, it is critical that you attend and participate fully every week. Consistent class presence and participation is required to do well in this course.

If you have a legitimate reason to miss class – such as job/grad-school/medical-school interviews, health/medical needs, or any other hard life circumstances – just let me know as soon as you can. I will always be willing to work with you to figure out how to accommodate your constraints/circumstances and how you may makeup for any lost time/points if needed. Same goes for meeting the multiple assignment and project due dates. I know that things are pretty tough now. So, just keep me posted and I will support you.

If there are multiple absences without _any_ notice or explaination, that will result reduction in points allocated for attendance. Similarly, not completing assignment or project milestones without _any_ notice/explanation will result in reduction of points at the discretion of the instructor.


## Code of Conduct
All conduct should serve the singular goal of sustain a friendly, respectful, supportive, and fun environment where we can do our best work and have a great time doing it.
* Do work that you’re proud of, be it a small piece of code or the entire project.
* Be supportive of your classmates; respect each others' strengths, weaknesses, differences, and beliefs.
* Communicate openly & respectfully with everyone in the class. We can all begin by using the correct name and pronouns for everyone in this class.
* When you ask for help from your fellow learners, respect and appreciate their time and effort.

Respectful and responsible behavior is expected at all times, which includes not interrupting other students, turning your cell phone off, refraining from non-course-related use of electronic devices, and not using offensive or demeaning language in our discussions. Flagrant or repeated violations of this expectation may result in ejection from the classroom/session, grade-related penalties, and/or involvement of the university Ombudsperson.

I am unequivocally dedicated to providing a harassment-free experience for everyone, regardless of gender, gender identity and expression, age, sexual orientation, disability, physical appearance, body size, race, or religion (or lack thereof). I will not tolerate harassment of colleagues in any form. Behaviors that could be considered discriminatory or harassing, or unwanted sexual attention, will not be tolerated and will be immediately reported to the appropriate MSU office (which may include the MSU Police Department).

### Discussing Concerns
If you have concerns that you would like to inform me about, I will listen while keeping your safety and wellbeing as my priority.

Note that, as a member of the university community, I have the responsibility to report any instances of sexual harassment, sexual violence and/or other forms of prohibited discrimination.

If you would rather share information about sexual harassment, sexual violence or discrimination to a confidential employee who does not have this reporting responsibility, you can find a list of those individuals [here](https://centerforsurvivors.msu.edu/education-resources/index.html). I especially recommend the [Office of the University Ombudsperson](https://ombud.msu.edu/) that offers students a confidential and impartial place to discuss academic and nonacademic concerns. Staff in this office will assist you to define problems, explore options, outline strategies, review policies, find resources, and manage expectations while upholding the values of respect, integrity, diversity and freedom from bias or harassment.

### Chosen Name and Pronoun
All people have the right to be addressed and referred to in accordance with their personal identity. Many people do not identify with the name on their birth certificate, school ID, or other forms of identification. At the beginning of this class, everyone indicates the name and the pronouns they use. If you would like to change your name, you can do that through StuInfo. Your gender marker can be changed by filing a request at the Office of the Registrar at the Hannah Administration Building. More information about MSU’s preferred name policy can be found at: https://lbgtrc.msu.edu/trans-msu/msu-preferred-name-policy/. Please advise me at any point if you need to update your name and/or pronouns in my records.


## Academic honesty
Intellectual integrity is the foundation of the scientific enterprise. In all instances, you must do your own work and give proper credit to all sources that you use in your papers and oral presentations – any instance of submitting another person's work, ideas, or wording as your own counts as plagiarism. This includes failing to cite any direct quotations in your essays, research paper, class debate, or written presentation. The MSU College of Natural Science adheres to the policies of academic honesty as specified in the General Student Regulations 1.0, Protection of Scholarship and Grades, and in the all-University statement on Integrity of Scholarship and Grades, which are included in Spartan Life: Student Handbook and Resource Guide. Students who plagiarize will receive a 0.0 in the course. In addition, University policy requires that any cheating offense, regardless of the magnitude of the infraction or punishment decided upon by the professor, be reported immediately to the dean of the student's college.

It is important to note that **plagiarism in the context of this course includes, but is not limited to**, directly copying another student's solutions to in-class or homework problems; copying materials from online sources, textbooks, or other reference materials without citing those references in your source code or documentation, or having somebody else do your pre-class work, in-class work, or homework on your behalf. Any work that is done in collaboration with other students should state this explicitly, and have their names as well as yours listed clearly.

More broadly, we ask that students adhere to the Spartan Code of Honor academic pledge, as written by the Associated Students of Michigan State University (ASMSU): "As a Spartan, I will strive to uphold values of the highest ethical standard. I will practice honesty in my work, foster honesty in my peers, and take pride in knowing that honor is worth more than grades. I will carry these values beyond my time as a student at Michigan State University, continuing the endeavor to build personal integrity in all that I do."


## Accomodations
If you have a university-documented learning difficulty or require other accommodations, please provide me with your VISA as soon as possible and speak with me about how I can assist you in your learning.  If you do not have a VISA but have been documented with a learning difficulty or other problems for which you may still require accommodation, please contact MSU’s Resource Center for People with Disabilities (at 517-884-RCPD or on the [web](https://rcpd.msu.edu)) in order to acquire current documentation.


#### \[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/README.md#cmse-410-890-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]

Commit message:

add mental & physical health resources

2021-spring_compbio/policies.md, after:

# [CMSE 410/890: Bioinformatics and Computational Biology](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/README.md)

>[Schedule, Lectures, and Assignments](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/schedule-lectures-assignments.md)  
>[Website and Communication](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/website-communication.md)  
>[Course Activities and Grading](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/course-activities-grading.md)  
>Presence, Conduct, Honesty, and Accommodations  
>[Learning Online](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/learning-online.md)  


# Presence, Conduct, Honesty, and Accommodations
I think of each class I teach as a _collaborative learning community_ where we can all work together to enhance each other's learning. To foster this community, my goal is to make sure that our class is a space where all of you can join in, breathe, be seen & heard, be curious, and openly engage with the ideas. You absolutely belong here and you will be valued and respected. Your unique background, training, and life experiences are your strength, and everyone including me** will be benefit from listening to you and learning from you.

>** I have designed and am teaching this class to also maximize my learning, identify gaps in my knowledge, and find better ways of discussing each of the many complex/interesting ideas.

In service of this goal, below are all the policies we will follow. If you have a concern about the policies and procedures of this class, please contact me.  

## Class Presence
If you sincerely engage with the class and put in earnest effort, you will do well. Your can do so by:
- Completing the pre-class assignments and additional readings.
- Showing up to the online class on time and stay for the whole hour.
- Responding to prompts from Arjun during the lectures.
- Asking questions about computational or biological concepts (because no one will have the perfect background).
- Working in groups during in-class discussion sessions.
- Correcting me when I am wrong.

### Attendance
All these activities are heavily based on material presented and worked on in class. So, it is critical that you attend and participate fully every week. Consistent class presence and participation is required to do well in this course.

If you have a legitimate reason to miss class – such as job/grad-school/medical-school interviews, health/medical needs, or any other hard life circumstances – just let me know as soon as you can. I will always be willing to work with you to figure out how to accommodate your constraints/circumstances and how you may makeup for any lost time/points if needed. Same goes for meeting the multiple assignment and project due dates. I know that things are pretty tough now. So, just keep me posted and I will support you.

If there are multiple absences without _any_ notice or explaination, that will result reduction in points allocated for attendance. Similarly, not completing assignment or project milestones without _any_ notice/explanation will result in reduction of points at the discretion of the instructor.


## Code of Conduct
All conduct should serve the singular goal of sustain a friendly, respectful, supportive, and fun environment where we can do our best work and have a great time doing it.
* Do work that you’re proud of, be it a small piece of code or the entire project.
* Be supportive of your classmates; respect each others' strengths, weaknesses, differences, and beliefs.
* Communicate openly & respectfully with everyone in the class. We can all begin by using the correct name and pronouns for everyone in this class.
* When you ask for help from your fellow learners, respect and appreciate their time and effort.

Respectful and responsible behavior is expected at all times, which includes not interrupting other students, turning your cell phone off, refraining from non-course-related use of electronic devices, and not using offensive or demeaning language in our discussions. Flagrant or repeated violations of this expectation may result in ejection from the classroom/session, grade-related penalties, and/or involvement of the university Ombudsperson.

I am unequivocally dedicated to providing a harassment-free experience for everyone, regardless of gender, gender identity and expression, age, sexual orientation, disability, physical appearance, body size, race, or religion (or lack thereof). I will not tolerate harassment of colleagues in any form. Behaviors that could be considered discriminatory or harassing, or unwanted sexual attention, will not be tolerated and will be immediately reported to the appropriate MSU office (which may include the MSU Police Department).

### Discussing or raising concerns
If you experience, observe, or just want to talk through anything in this regard to your or anyone else's safety and well-being, talk to me. I will not tolerate any discrimination or harassment. You can rest assured that you can come to me and I will listen and I will believe. I will support you and advocate for you with everthing within my power.

Note that, as a member of the university community, I have the responsibility to report any instances of sexual harassment, sexual violence and/or other forms of prohibited discrimination. If you would rather share information about sexual harassment, sexual violence or discrimination to a confidential employee who does not have this reporting responsibility, you can find a list of those individuals [here](https://centerforsurvivors.msu.edu/education-resources/index.html). I especially recommend the [Office of the University Ombudsperson](https://ombud.msu.edu/) that offers students a confidential and impartial place to discuss academic and nonacademic concerns. Staff in this office will assist you to define problems, explore options, outline strategies, review policies, find resources, and manage expectations while upholding the values of respect, integrity, diversity and freedom from bias or harassment.

### Chosen name and Pronoun
All people have the right to be addressed and referred to in accordance with their personal identity. Many people do not identify with the name on their birth certificate, school ID, or other forms of identification. At the beginning of this class, everyone indicates the name and the pronouns they use. If you would like to change your name, you can do that through StuInfo. Your gender marker can be changed by filing a request at the Office of the Registrar at the Hannah Administration Building. More information about MSU’s preferred name policy can be found at: https://lbgtrc.msu.edu/trans-msu/msu-preferred-name-policy/. Please advise me at any point if you need to update your name and/or pronouns in my records.


## Mental and Physical Health
University life, undergraduate/graduate studies, research, living away from home, and personal relationships – any of these can spring formidable challenges to our mental well-being in unsuspecting, surprising ways, nothing to say of **the isolation and anxiety in the middle of a raging pandemic and volatile socio-political climate**. Plus, the confinement is not good for your physical health.

To mitigate these ill effects, I hope you are able to make time to take care of yourself (socialize remotely, exercise, eat healthy, sleep, blow off steam, etc.). I also hope that when you feel low, when your physical/mental wellness is being put to test, you will talk to a friend, a friendly colleague, or a close family member.

I also welcome you to talk to me. You can come to me anytime with any challenge you face and I will listen. I will do my best to learn about any issue you have (without any judgement, I promise), keep anything you share confidential, and offer my thoughts based on my experience. It is my wish, duty, and privilege to be of help in any way to ensure your mental (& physical) well-being so that you can get a great education and have a good time doing it.

Finally, I urge you to take advantage of many resources available on campus to support your health and wellness including the [Counseling and Psychiatric Services](https://caps.msu.edu/). They are virtual now and hence, easy to reach out to.


## Academic Honesty
Intellectual integrity is the foundation of the scientific enterprise. In all instances, you must do your own work and give proper credit to all sources that you use in your papers and oral presentations – any instance of submitting another person's work, ideas, or wording as your own counts as plagiarism. This includes failing to cite any direct quotations in your essays, research paper, class debate, or written presentation. The MSU College of Natural Science adheres to the policies of academic honesty as specified in the General Student Regulations 1.0, Protection of Scholarship and Grades, and in the all-University statement on Integrity of Scholarship and Grades, which are included in Spartan Life: Student Handbook and Resource Guide. Students who plagiarize will receive a 0.0 in the course. In addition, University policy requires that any cheating offense, regardless of the magnitude of the infraction or punishment decided upon by the professor, be reported immediately to the dean of the student's college.

It is important to note that **plagiarism in the context of this course includes, but is not limited to**, directly copying another student's solutions to in-class or homework problems; copying materials from online sources, textbooks, or other reference materials without citing those references in your source code or documentation, or having somebody else do your pre-class work, in-class work, or homework on your behalf. Any work that is done in collaboration with other students should state this explicitly, and have their names as well as yours listed clearly.

More broadly, we ask that students adhere to the Spartan Code of Honor academic pledge, as written by the Associated Students of Michigan State University (ASMSU): "As a Spartan, I will strive to uphold values of the highest ethical standard. I will practice honesty in my work, foster honesty in my peers, and take pride in knowing that honor is worth more than grades. I will carry these values beyond my time as a student at Michigan State University, continuing the endeavor to build personal integrity in all that I do."


## Accomodations
If you have a university-documented learning difficulty or require other accommodations, please provide me with your VISA as soon as possible and speak with me about how I can assist you in your learning.  If you do not have a VISA but have been documented with a learning difficulty or other problems for which you may still require accommodation, please contact MSU’s Resource Center for People with Disabilities (at 517-884-RCPD or on the [web](https://rcpd.msu.edu)) in order to acquire current documentation.


#### \[ [Top](https://github.com/krishnanlab/teaching/blob/master/2021-spring_compbio/README.md#cmse-410-890-bioinformatics-and-computational-biology) ]
